

DNS Extensions                                                 R. Arends
Internet-Draft                                      Telematica Instituut
Expires: June 1, 2003                                          M. Larson
                                                                VeriSign
                                                               D. Massey
                                                                 USC/ISI
                                                                 S. Rose
                                                                    NIST
                                                           December 2002


               DNS Security Introduction and Requirements
                   draft-ietf-dnsext-dnssec-intro-04

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 1, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The Domain Name System Security Extensions (DNSSEC) provide data
   origin authentication and data integrity.  This document introduces
   these extensions and describes their capabilities and limitations.
   The services that the security extensions provide and do not provide
   are discussed.  Lastly, the group of documents that describe the DNS
   security extensions and their interrelationships is discussed.



Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Definitions of Important DNSSEC Terms  . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Services Provided by DNS Security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.1 Data Origin Authentication and Data Integrity  . . . . . . . .  5
   3.2 Authenticating Name and Type Non-Existence . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Services Not Provided by DNS Security  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Resolver Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Zone Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.1 TTL values vs. SIG validity period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.2 New Temporal Issues for Zones  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Server Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  DNS Security Document Family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.1 DNS Security Document Roadmap  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.2 Categories of DNS Security Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   10. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   11. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
       Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20




























Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


1. Introduction

   This document introduces the Domain Name System Security Extensions
   (DNSSEC).  This document and a collection of related documents update
   RFC 2535 [3] and its related documents to further clarify and refine
   the security extensions defined in RFC 2535.  These security
   extensions consist of a set of new resource record types and
   modifications to the existing DNS protocol [2].  The new records and
   protocol modifications are not fully described in this document, but
   in a family of documents outlined in Section 8.  The capabilities and
   limitations of the security extensions are described in greater
   detail in Section 3 and Section 4, respectively.

   These three documents update/obsolete RFC's: 2525, 3008, 3090, 3225,
   3226, 3445 and Internet Drafts: "Redefinition of the AD bit",
   "Delegation Signer Resource Record", "DNSSEC Opt-In".  See [18] for
   more details of these documents.

   Lastly, the effect that these security extensions will have on
   resolvers, zones and servers is discussed in Section 5, Section 6 and
   Section 7, respectively.

   The DNS security extensions provide data origin authentication and
   data integrity protection as well as a means of public key
   distribution.  The security extensions do not provide protection
   against other types of attack, nor do they provide confidentiality.

























Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


2. Definitions of Important DNSSEC Terms

   authentication key: A public key, for a zone or a host, that a
      resolver trusts and that can therefore be used to verify data.  A
      key can become trusted in two ways:  First, it can be statically
      configured and declared in the resolver's initial configuration.
      Second, if a new key is referenced by a DS record that is signed
      by an already known authentication key, and the signature
      verifies, the new key becomes trusted by the resolver.

   key signing key: Described in [14] An authentication key that is only
      used to sign a DNSSEC authentication key.  The zone authentication
      key may be changed frequently (according to local policy), while
      the key signing key is used as a more static secure entry point
      for the zone.  Designating a key signing key is an operational
      issue only, the key is treated the same way as an authentication
      key by the DNS.

   authentication chain: In DNSSEC, a key signs a DS record, which
      points to another key (or key signing key), which in turn signs
      another DS record, which points to yet another key, etc.
      Eventually ending with a key that has generated a SIG over a RR
      set.  This alternating succession of KEY and DS records forms a
      chain of signed data, with each link in the chain vouching for the
      next.  A resolver starting at a piece of data in the chain signed
      by a known authentication key can verify all subsequent
      signatures.  Thus all subsequent data in the chain is verified and
      authenticated.

   security-aware resolver: A resolver (defined in section 2.4 of [1])
      that understands the DNS security extensions defined in this
      document set.  In particular, a security-aware resolver uses known
      authentication keys to verify signatures over RRsets and
      (optionally) DNS messages.

   security-aware server: A name server (also defined in section 2.4 of
      [1]) that understands the DNS security extensions.  In particular,
      it supports the KEY, SIG, DS and NXT record types, a larger DNS
      message size via EDNS0, and other protocol changes such as support
      for the OK bit.  Also called a "secure server".

   unsecure server: The proper term for the opposite of a security-aware
      server.

   signed zone: A zone whose RRsets are signed and which contains
      properly constructed KEY, SIG, NXT and (optionally) DS records.

   unsigned zone: The proper term for the opposite of a secure zone.



Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


3. Services Provided by DNS Security

   The Domain Name System (DNS) protocol security extensions provide
   data origin authentication and data integrity assurance.  In
   addition, a means of providing an authenticated denial of existence
   is provided, as described below.

   These services protect against the threats to the Domain Name System
   described in [11].

3.1 Data Origin Authentication and Data Integrity

   Authentication is provided by cryptographically generated digital
   signatures associated with DNS RRsets.  These digital signatures are
   stored in a new resource record, the SIG record.  Typically, there
   will be a single private key that signs a zone's data, but multiple
   keys are possible; e.g., for different digital signature algorithms.
   If a security-aware resolver reliably learns a zone's public key, it
   can authenticate that zone's signed data.  An important DNSSEC
   concept is that the key that signs a zone's data is associated with
   the zone itself and not with the zone's authoritative servers
   (although hosts/services can also have key pairs in DNSSEC; see the
   reference to SIG(0) in [7] ).  Security-aware servers attempt to send
   the signature(s) needed to authenticate an RRset in the DNS reply
   message along with the RRset itself, provided there is space
   available in the message.

   A resolver could learn a zone's public key by having the key
   statically configured or by normal DNS resolution.  To allow the
   latter, public keys are stored in a new resource record, the KEY
   record.  Note that the private keys used to sign zone data must be
   kept secure and best practices call for them to be stored offline.
   To reliably discover a public key by DNS resolution, the key itself
   needs to be signed by either a statically configured authentication
   key or another key that has been previously authenticated.  Zone
   information is authenticated by forming a chain from a newly learned
   public key back to a previously known authentication public key
   (which is either statically configured or previously learned and
   verified).  Therefore, the resolver must be configured with at least
   one public key (either a zone signing key or key signing key) that
   authenticates one zone (or zone key, in the case of a key signing
   key) as a starting point.  To establish this authentication chain,
   security-aware servers attempt to send the signature(s) needed to
   authenticate a zone's public key in the DNS reply message along with
   the public key itself, provided there is space available in the
   message.

   The authentication chain specified in the original DNS security



Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


   extensions proceeded from signed KEY record to signed KEY record, as
   necessary, and finally to the queried RRset.  A new record, the
   delegation signer (DS), has been added for additional flexibility.
   The DS RRset resides at a delegation point in a parent zone and
   specifies the keys used by the specified child zone to self-sign the
   KEY RRset at its apex.  The child, in turn, uses one of these keys to
   sign its zone data.  The authentication chain is therefore DS->KEY-
   >[DS->KEY->...]->RRset.

   This authentication chain is normally constructed "top down" (i.e.
   from the root "." to the leaf zones).  However, this is base DNSSEC
   protocol only.  Local policy on authentication of RR sets may
   override this policy.  Ultimately, authentication is a matter of
   local, resolver policy which may extend, or even override the
   protocol extensions defined in this document set.

   Adding data origin authentication and data integrity requires minor
   changes to the on-the-wire DNS protocol.  Four new resource record
   types are required:  SIG, KEY, DS and NXT.  EDNS0 support [4] for
   larger message sizes [9] is required, as is support for the OK bit
   [8].  EDNS0 support is required for the larger DNS message sizes that
   result when DNSSEC RRs are added.  Support for the OK bit (part of
   EDNS0) is required for a security aware resolver to indicate that it
   is security-aware and wishes for DNSSEC RR types to be added to the
   response.

3.2 Authenticating Name and Type Non-Existence

   The security mechanism referenced above in Section 3.1 only provides
   a way to sign existing RRsets in a zone.  The problem of providing
   negative responses with the same level of authentication and
   integrity requires the use of another new resource record, the non-
   existence (NXT) record.  The NXT record allows a negative reply
   (either for name or type non-existence) to be authenticated the same
   way as other DNS replies.  NXT records require a canonical
   representation and order for domain names in zones.  NXT records
   exist to cover the gaps, or "empty space", between domain names in a
   zone, as well as non-existent record types for existing names.  Each
   NXT record is signed and authenticated in the same way as any other
   RRset.











Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


4. Services Not Provided by DNS Security

   The DNS design philosophy calls for all DNS data to be public and
   uniform answers to all inquirers.  Accordingly, confidentiality for
   queries or responses is not provided, nor are any sort of access
   control lists or other means to differentiate inquirers.

   There is no protection against denial of service attacks.  Security-
   aware resolvers and security-aware servers are vulnerable to another
   class of DoS based on cryptographic operations.  See the Security
   Considerations section below.

   The DNSSEC extensions provide data and origin authentication of DNS
   data.  No protection is extended to operations such as zone transfers
   and dynamic update [16].  Message authentication schemes described in
   [5] and [7] address security operations that pertain to these
   transactions.

   Signed zone data and/or the use of transaction authentication will
   not protect against errors in DNS zone information or servers
   incorrectly interpreting and/or setting DNS message header fields.
   The security extensions cannot insure the correctness of DNS
   information.

   Ultimately, final authentication is a matter of local policy.  A
   local policy might extend or override the protocol extensions defined
   in this document set.
























Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


5. Resolver Considerations

   A security-aware resolver needs to be able to perform necessary
   cryptographic functions to verify digital signatures using at least
   the mandatory-to-implement algorithms.  Security-aware resolvers must
   also be capable of forming a authentication chain from a newly
   learned zone back to a authentication key (as defined above).  This
   process might require additional queries of intermediate DNS zones
   for necessary KEY, DS and SIG records.  It is assumed that a
   security-aware resolver will be configured with at least one
   authentication key to establish an authentication chain.

   The stub resolver found in many hosts may be augmented to provide a
   different set of security features instead of the full security
   awareness found in a security-aware resolver.  The use of transaction
   authentication (i.e.  SIG(0) or TSIG) could help secure the final
   message passing between a security-aware DNS server and a stub
   resolver.  This a matter of local security policy.  Note that
   transaction authentication changes the DNS protocol.  Using SIG(0) or
   TSIG keys means that DNS clients now can have identity and are no
   longer anonymous.  Possession of a key used for transaction
   authentication could allow a security aware server to identify a
   resolver and segregate resolvers it accepts queries from.

   A security aware stub resolver ought to be configured to make use of
   a security aware full resolver (e.g.  part of a security-aware
   caching server) and to communicate with it using some form of
   integrity protection for queries and responses.  Examples of
   integrity protection are transaction authentication schemes as
   defined in the context of DNS and/or IPsec to protect all traffic
   from the stub resolver's host to the host of a security aware full
   resolver.

   If a security aware full resolver is configured to forward queries to
   another full resolver, the latter is recommended to be security aware
   also.  If not, the security aware resolver might not be able to
   obtain the data needed to make a security determination.  A security
   aware resolver ought to be capable of contacting the authoritative
   servers directly, but do so with the consideration of performance
   impacts.

   If a security aware resolver is separated from authoritative servers
   by a caching resolver that is not security aware, it is possible that
   the security aware resolver will only be able to operate in an
   insecure mode.  For example, if a security aware resolver's packets
   are routed through a device (such as a Network Address Translator)
   that acts as a DNS proxy and is not security aware, it might not be
   possible to deliver secured responses.  This is because the base DNS



Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


   protocol does not provide means to remotely manage intermediate DNS
   caches, hence, it is possible that some data may be 'stuck' or
   dropped in the cache and prevent construction of the authentication
   chain by the client resolver.

   If an unsecure server or an unsigned zone results in a break in the
   authentication chain, the resolver cannot ensure security.  If a
   security-aware resolver must rely on an unsecure server (or unsigned
   zone) that cannot supply the necessary security RRs, the resolver
   cannot verify DNS responses and should rely on local policy when
   accepting responses.








































Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


6. Zone Considerations

   A secure zone will have several differences from an unsigned zone.  A
   secure zone will contain additional security-related records (SIG,
   KEY, DS and NXT records).  SIG and NXT records may be generated by a
   signing process prior to serving the zone.  Zone data is only valid
   and considered secure for a definable time period.  The SIG records
   that accompany zone data have defined inception and expiration times.
   These times establish a validity period for the signatures and the
   zone data the signatures cover.

6.1 TTL values vs. SIG validity period

   It is important to note the distinction between an RRset's TTL value
   and the signature validity period specified in the SIG RR covering an
   RRset.  DNSSEC does not change the definition of the TTL value, which
   is intended to maintain database coherency in caches: stale RRsets
   are purged from caches after the period of time defined in the TTL
   field.

   The inception and expiration fields in the SIG RR [12], on the other
   hand, specify the time period when the signature can be used to
   validate its covering RRset.  Zone data is only (cryptographically)
   valid and secure (pending verification of the signature) for a
   specific time period and these fields establish the time period that
   a given signature covers the RRset.  The TTL value should not be used
   to artificially extend the validity period of signed RR sets in a
   cache, but the signature validity period may decrease the TTL of
   signed RRsets in a cache.

6.2 New Temporal Issues for Zones

   With the addition of the security extensions, zone information now
   has a temporal factor that did not previously exist in the DNS
   protocol.  The signature validity period is a time period for which
   an RRset can be considered valid, and applies only to the specific
   RRset, not to the zone as a whole.  A signed zone requires regular
   maintenance to ensure each RRset in the zone has a temporally valid
   SIG RR.  This might also require a "zone load" which will be defined
   as an increase in a SOA serial number, indicating a zone change has
   occurred and may cause zone transfers to take place (IXFR or AXFR).










Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


7. Server Considerations

   A security-aware server must be capable of performing the following
   operations in addition to the normal operations of a DNS server
   described in [2]:

      A security-aware server should make all attempts to include
      necessary security-related records (SIG, KEY, DS and NXT) in
      responses as DNS message space permits.

      A caching (i.e.  recursive) security-aware server should also take
      a signature's validation period into consideration when
      determining the time to live (TTL) of cached data: signed data
      should not be cached beyond the signature validity period.

      All means of restricting query, zone transfer, dynamic update and
      administrative access to an authoritative security-aware server
      fall under the category of operational security and are not
      addressed by the DNS security extensions.  Such issues fall under
      the need for transaction security (see [5] and [7] ).































Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


8. DNS Security Document Family

   The DNSSEC set of documents can be partitioned into five main groups
   as depicted in Figure 1.  All these documents are in turn under the
   larger umbrella of the DNS base protocol documents described in [18].

8.1 DNS Security Document Roadmap

   ---------------------------------------------------------------------


                    +--------------------------------+
                    |                                |
                    |    Base DNS Protocol Docs      |
                    |   [RFC1035, RFC2181, etc.]     |
                    |                                |
                    +--------------------------------+
                                    |
                                    |
                              +-----------+          +-------------+
                              |  DNSSEC   |          |  New        |
                              | Protocol  |--------->|  Security   |
                              | Documents |          |  Uses       |
                              +-----------+          +-------------+
                                    |
                                    |
                     +---------------- - - - - - - -+
                     |                              .
                     |                              .
               +------------+               +---------------+
               |  Dig. Sig. |               |               |
               |  Algorithm |               |  Transaction  |
               |  Impl.     |               |  Impl.        |
               |            |               |               |
               +------------+               +---------------+

                   Figure 1: DNSSEC Document Roadmap

   ---------------------------------------------------------------------


8.2 Categories of DNS Security Documents

   The "DNSSEC protocol document set" refers to the three documents that
   form the core of the DNS security extensions:

   1.  DNS Security Introduction and Requirements (this document)




Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


   2.  Resource Records for DNS Security Extensions [12]

   3.  Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security Extensions [13]

   The "Dig.  Sig.  Algorithm Impl." document set refers to the group of
   documents that describe how specific digital signature algorithms
   should be implemented to fit the DNSSEC resource record format.  Each
   of these documents deals with a specific digital signature algorithm.

   The "Transaction Impl." document set refers to the group of documents
   that deal with DNS message authentication, including secret key
   establishment and verification.  While not strictly part of the DNS
   Security specification as defined in this set of documents, it should
   be included here to note its relationship to the DNS Security
   extensions.

   The final document set, "New Security Uses", refers to documents that
   seek to use proposed DNS Security extensions for other security
   related purposes.  The DNSSEC extensions does not provide any direct
   security for these new uses, by may be used to support them.
   Documents that fall in this category include the use of DNS in the
   storage and distribution of certificates [15] and individual user
   public keys (PGP, e-mail, etc.) [17].




























Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


9. IANA Considerations

   This document introduces no new IANA considerations.
















































Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


10. Security Considerations

   This document introduces the DNS security extensions and describes
   the document set that contains the new security records and DNS
   protocol modifications.  The capabilities and limitations of these
   extensions are discussed.  The extensions provide data origin
   authentication and data integrity using digital signatures over
   resource record sets.

   In order for a secure resolver to validate a DNS response, all the
   intermediate zones and servers must be capable of DNS security
   processing as defined in this document set.  A security-aware
   resolver cannot verify responses originating from an unsigned zone or
   a zone served by a non-security-aware server.  If there is a break in
   the authentication chain (i.e., no authentication key can be
   obtained), then a security aware resolver cannot verify those DNS
   responses.  Other methods of adding security to a DNS query such as
   using a secure channel (e.g.  IPSec tunnel, etc.) or using
   transaction authentication over DNS messages are not discussed in
   these documents.  Local security policy may extend or override the
   protocol modifications described in this document set.

   The DNS security extensions do not protect against denial of service
   (DoS) attacks or provide confidentiality.  The DNSSEC extensions does
   open a new class of cryptographic based class of DoS attacks against
   a security-aware resolver or security-aware server.  These attacks
   attempt to occupy a system's resources with cryptographic operations.

   There is now also the ability to enumerate all the names in a zone by
   following the NXT chain.  The NXT RR indicates which names do not
   exist in a zone by linking a name to the next canonical name in a
   zone.  A resolver can query these NXT RRs to obtain all the hostnames
   in a zone.  While this might not be considered an attack to the
   public DNS, this could allow a mapping of network hosts by
   enumerating the contents of a zone.
















Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


11. Acknowledgements

   This document was created from the input and ideas of several members
   of the DNS Extensions Working Group.  The authors would like to
   acknowledge (in alphabetical order) the following people for their
   contributions and comments on this document:

     Derek Atkins
     Rob Austein
     Donald Eastlake
     Miek Gieben
     Olafur Gudmundsson
     Olaf Kolkman
     Ed Lewis
     Ted Lindgreen
     Bill Manning
     Brian Wellington


































Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


Normative References

   [1]   Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities", STD
         13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [2]   Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
         specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [3]   Eastlake, D., "Domain Name System Security Extensions", RFC
         2535, March 1999.

   [4]   Vixie, P., "Extension Mechanisms for DNS (EDNS0)", RFC 2671,
         August 1999.

   [5]   Vixie, P., Gudmundsson, O., Eastlake, D. and B. Wellington,
         "Secret Key Transaction Authentication for DNS (TSIG)", RFC
         2845, May 2000.

   [6]   Eastlake, D., "Secret Key Establishment for DNS (TKEY RR)", RFC
         2930, September 2000.

   [7]   Eastlake, D., "DNS Request and Transaction Signatures (
         SIG(0)s)", RFC 2931, September 2000.

   [8]   Conrad, D., "Indicating Resolver Support of DNSSEC", RFC 3225,
         December 2001.

   [9]   Gudmundsson, O., "DNSSEC and IPv6 A6 aware server/resolver
         message size requirements", RFC 3226, December 2001.

   [10]  Massey, D. and S. Rose, "Limiting the Scope of the KEY Resource
         Record (RR)", RFC 3445, December 2002.

   [11]  Atkins, D. and R. Austein, "Threat Analysis Of The Domain Name
         System", draft-ietf-dnsext-dns-threats-02 (work in progress),
         February 2002.

   [12]  Arends, R., Larson, M., Massey, D. and S. Rose, "Resource
         Records for DNS Security Extensions", draft-ietf-dnsext-dnssec-
         records-02 (work in progress), November 2002.

   [13]  Arends, R., Larson, M., Massey, D. and S. Rose, "Protocol
         Modifications for the DNS Security Extensions", draft-ietf-
         dnsext-dnssec-protocol-00 (work in progress), October 2002.

   [14]  Kolkman, O. and J. Schlyter, "KEY RR Key Signing Key (KSK)
         Flag", draft-ietf-dnsext-keyrr-key-signing-flag-05 (work in
         progress), December 2002.



Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


Informative References

   [15]  Eastlake, D. and O. Gudmundsson, "Storing Certificates in the
         Domain Name System (DNS)", RFC 2538, March 1999.

   [16]  Wellington, B., "Secure Domain Name System (DNS) Dynamic
         Update", RFC 3007, November 2000.

   [17]  Schlyter, J., "Storing application public keys in the DNS",
         draft-schlyter-appkey-02 (work in progress), February 2002.

   [18]  Rose, S., "DNS Security Document Roadmap", draft-ietf-dnsext-
         dnssec-roadmap-06 (work in progress), November 2001.


Authors' Addresses

   Roy Arends
   Telematica Instituut
   Drienerlolaan 5
   7522 NB  Enschede
   NL

   EMail: roy@logmess.com


   Matt Larson
   VeriSign, Inc.
   21345 Ridgetop Circle
   Dulles, VA  20166-6503
   USA

   EMail: mlarson@verisign.com


   Dan Massey
   USC Information Sciences Institute
   3811 N. Fairfax Drive
   Arlington, VA  22203
   USA

   EMail: masseyd@isi.edu









Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


   Scott Rose
   National Institute for Standards and Technology
   100 Bureau Drive
   Gaithersburg, MD  20899-8920
   USA

   EMail: scott.rose@nist.gov












































Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       DNSSEC Intro. and Requirements        December 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Arends, et al.            Expires June 1, 2003                 [Page 20]

