

Network Working Group                                          L. Daigle
Internet-Draft                                                 A. Newton
Expires: May 5, 2003                                      VeriSign, Inc.
                                                        November 4, 2002


    Domain-based Application Service Location Using SRV RRs and the
              Dynamic Delegation Discovery Service (DDDS)
                       draft-daigle-napstr-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 5, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo defines a Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) [3]
   Application for domain name based discovery of application services.
   Essentially, this uses DNS NAPTR resource records [4] to provide one
   more layer of redirection for service lookup than is feasible with
   SRV ([2]) records.  It is proposed because real-life use is
   demonstrating a need for something slightly more substantial than
   SRV, and alternatively SRV usage may become twisted out of its
   intended shape.





Daigle & Newton            Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           draft-daigle-napstr-01            November 2002


1. Introduction

   Increasingly, application protocol standards are using domain names
   to identify server targets, and stipulating that clients should look
   up SRV ([2]) resource records to determine the host and port
   providing the server.  This enables a distinction between naming an
   application service target and actually hosting the server.  It also
   increases flexibility in hosting the target service -- the server may
   be operated by a completely different organization without having to
   delegate some portion of the zone, multiple instances can be set up
   (e.g., for load balancing or secondaries), it can be moved from time
   to time without disrupting clients' access, etc.  This is quite
   useful, but Section 4 outlines some of the limitations inherent in
   the approach.

   To address some of the limitations, this document defines a DDDS [3]
   Application to map service+protocol+domain to specific server
   addresses using both NAPTR [4] and SRV DNS resource records.  This
   can be viewed as a more general version of the use of SRV and/or a
   very restricted application of the use of NAPTR resource records.

   That is, while SRV records can be used to map from a specific service
   name and protocol for a specific domain to a specific server, SRV
   records are limited to one layer of indirection, and are focused on
   server administration rather than on application naming.  And, while
   the DDDS specification and use of NAPTR allows multiple levels of
   redirection before locating the target server machine with an SRV
   record, this proposal requires only a subset of NAPTR strictly bound
   to domain names, without making use of the REGEXP field of NAPTR.
   These restrictions make the client's resolution process much more
   predictable (prefetchable, cachable) than with some uses of NAPTR
   records.

   This form of naming indirection (using just SRV records, or DDDS) has
   implications for application protocols attempting to validate
   security credentials.  This is discussed in Section 6.

   For the purposes of this document:

   o  an "application service" is a generic term for some generic type
      of application, independent of the protocol that may be used to
      offer it.

   o  an "application protocol" is a standard protocol used to
      implementone or several services

   For example, "e-mail" is an application service; "SMTP" is the
   protocol that is used to implement it.  "Instant Messaging" is an



Daigle & Newton            Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           draft-daigle-napstr-01            November 2002


   application service, for which there are several existing and
   proposed application protocols ("jabber", "simple", etc).  "LDAP" is
   an application protocol which can be used to implement several
   different application services (e.g., a "whitepages" service,
   directory enabled networking service, etc).

1.1 What this document means for application protocol developers

   The purpose of this document is to provide application standards
   developers with a  more powerful framework (than SRV RRs alone) for
   naming service targets, without requiring each application protocol
   (or service) standard to define a separate DDDS application.

   Note that this approach is intended specifically for use when it
   makes sense to associate services with particular domain names (e.g.,
   e-mail addresses, SIP addresses, etc).  A non-goal is having all
   manner of label mapped into domain names in order to use this.

   Specifically not addressed in this document is how to select the
   domain for which the service+protocol is being sought.  It is up to
   other conventions to define how that might be used (e.g., instant
   messaging standards can define what domain to use from IM URIs, how
   to step down from foobar.example.com to example.com, and so on, if
   that is applicable).

   Although this document proposes a DDDS application that does not use
   all the features of NAPTR resource records, it does not mean to imply
   that DNS resolvers should fail to implement all aspects of the NAPTR
   RR standard.  A DDDS application is a client use convention.

2. Basic Proposal

   The precise details of the specification of this DDDS application are
   given in Appendix A.  In general, the proposal is to store
   application service and protocol descriptions in NAPTR records for
   individual domains.  This will enable domain administrators to
   provide redirection to other domains that provision individual
   services, with appropriate weightings and preferences.

   Each "application service" will be associated with an IANA-registered
   tag.  For example, instant messaging is a type of application, which
   is implemented by many different application-layer protocols, and the
   tag "IM" (used as an illustration here) could be registered for it.

   An "application protocol" is a standard protocol used to implement
   the application service (as defined...  ??).

   The intention is that the combination of application service and



Daigle & Newton            Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           draft-daigle-napstr-01            November 2002


   protocol tags should be specific enough that finding a known pair
   (e.g., "IM+SIMPLE") is sufficient for a client to identify a server
   with which it can communicate.

3. Examples

3.1 Instant Messaging Services

   As it stands, there are several different protocols proposed for
   offering "instant message" services.  Assuming that "IM" was
   registered as an application service, this DDDS application could be
   used to determine the available services for delivering to a target.

   Two particular features of instant messaging should be noted:

   1.  gatewaying is expected to bridge communications across protocols

   2.  instant messaging servers are likely to be operated out of a
       different domain than the instant messaging address, and servers
       of different protocols may be offered by independent
       organizations

   For example, "thinkingcat.com" may support its own servers for the
   "apex" instant messaging protocol, but rely on outsourcing from
   "example.com" for "simple" and "prim" servers.

   Using this DDDS-based approach, thinkingcat.com can indicate a
   preference ranking for the different types of servers for the instant
   messaging service, and yet the out-sourcer can independently rank the
   preference and ordering of servers.  This independence is not
   achievable through the use of SRV records alone.

   Thus, to find the IM services for thinkingcat.com, the NAPTR records
   for thinkingcat.com are retrieved:

   thinkingcat.com.
   ;;	order	pref	flags	service	regexp	replacement
   IN NAPTR 100	10	"s"	"IM+apex" "" 	_apex._tcp.thinkingcat.com.
   IN NAPTR 100	20	"s"	"IM+prim" ""	_prim._tcp.example.com.
   IN NAPTR 100	30	"s"	"IM+simple" ""  _simple._tcp.example.com.

   and then the administrators at example.com can manage the preference
   rankings of the servers they use to support the prim service:








Daigle & Newton            Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           draft-daigle-napstr-01            November 2002


   _prim._tcp.example.com.
    ;;    Pref Weight Port  Target
   IN SRV 10    0     10001 bigiron.example.com
   IN SRV 20    0     10001 backup.im.example.com
   IN SRV 30    0     10001 nuclearfallout.example.com.au


3.2 Application Key Storage

   There is growing discussion of having a generic mechanism for
   locating the keys or certificates associated with particular
   application (servers) operated in (or for) a particular domain.
   Here's a hypothetical case for storing Application key or certificate
   data for a given domain.  The premise is that some AppKey service has
   been defined to be a leaf node service holding the keys/certs for the
   servers operated by (or for) the domain.  This DDDS-based approach is
   used to find the AppKey server that holds the information.

   thinkingcat.com.
   ;;	order	pref	flags	service	regexp	replacement
   IN NAPTR 100	10	"s"	"AppKey+LDAP" "" 	_ldap._tcp.thinkingcat.com
   IN NAPTR 100	20	"s"	"AppKey+LDAP" ""	_ldap._tcp.example.com


4. So, why not just SRV records?

   An expected question at this point is: this is so similar in
   structure to SRV records, why are we doing this with DDDS/NAPTR?

   Limitations of SRV include:

   o  SRV provides a single layer of indirection -- the outcome of an
      SRV lookup is a new domain name for which the A RR is to be found.

   o  the purpose of SRV is focused on individual server administration,
      not application naming: as stated in [2] "The SRV RR allows
      administrators to use several servers for a single domain, to move
      services from host to host with little fuss, and to designate some
      hosts as primary servers for a service and others as backups."

   o  target servers by "service" (e.g., "ldap") and "protocol" (e.g.,
      "tcp") in a given domain.  The definition of these terms implies
      specific things (e.g., that protocol should be one of UDP or TCP)
      without being precise.  Restriction to UDP and TCP is insufficient
      for the uses described here.

   The basic answer is that SRV records provide mappings from protocol
   names to host and port.  The use cases described herein require an



Daigle & Newton            Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           draft-daigle-napstr-01            November 2002


   additional layer -- from some service label to servers that may in
   fact be hosted within different administrative domains.  We could
   tweak SRV to say that the next lookup could be something other than
   an address record, but that is more complex than is necessary for
   most applications of SRV.

5. So, why not just NAPTR records?

   That's a trick question.  NAPTR records cannot appear in the wild --
   see [3].  They must be part of a DDDS application.

   The purpose here is to define a single, common mechanism (the DDDS
   application) to use NAPTR when all that is desired is simple DNS-
   based location of services.  This should be easy for applications to
   use -- some simple IANA registrations and it's done.

   Also, NAPTR has very powerful tools for expressing "rewrite" rules.
   That power (==complexity) makes some protocol designers and service
   administrators nervous.  The concern is that it can translate into
   unintelligle, noodle-like rule sets that are difficult to test and
   administer.

   This proposed DDDS application specifically uses a subset of NAPTR's
   abilities.  Only "replacement" expressions are allowed, not "regular
   expressions".

6. Transiting Trust

   One issue to be considered in the use of SRV records in general, and
   this proposal in particular, is the matter of trusting an end server
   once resolution of the end server's IP address is completed.  This
   can pose a problem when used with the popular model of trusting an
   end server in use on the Internet today, TLS.  Consider the following
   example of electronic commerce for which a user must make a trust
   association to an end server.

   1.  The end-user types into the browser the name of the server, for
       example "www.thinkingcat.com".

   2.  The server sends to the client its certificate and certificate
       chain information.

   3.  The client verifies the server's certificate via the certificate
       chain.

   4.  The client compares the domain name in the server's certificate
       to the domain name it was given.




Daigle & Newton            Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           draft-daigle-napstr-01            November 2002


   5.  The client sends the session key encrypted with the server's
       public key back to the server.

   6.  If the server is really the server it claims to be, then it will
       possess the corresponding private key to use in decrypting the
       session key.

   7.  The server and client communicate using encrypted means via the
       session key.

   However, the necessity for the client to compare the domain it was
   given with the domain name found in the certificate (step 4) can be
   problematic when the name resolution process changes the domain name
   being sought.  This problem can be solved using one of the two
   methods outlined below.  For full transition of trust using TLS, each
   method requires the use of DNSSEC [1] to insure the SRV and NAPTR
   records have not been compromised.  Neither method requires any
   change to either the TLS or DNSSEC protocols.

6.1 Using the Translated Name

   The first method is a simple modification of the client's use of the
   domain name in comparison with the name present in the certificate.
   The following is a modification of the process outlined above.

   1.  The end-user types into the client application the name of the
       server.  For this example, the client application is a PRIM
       client and the name of the server is "thinkingcat.com".

   2.  During the name resolution process for the PRIM service of
       "thinkingcat.com", the NAPTR record will yield the name
       "_prim._tcp.example.com".  The client must remember "example.com"
       (i.e., the label without the SRV-style service and protocol
       portions) as the translated name.

   3.  The server, bigiron.example.com, sends to the client its
       certificate for "example.com" and certificate chain information.

   4.  The client verifies the server's certificate via the certificate
       chain.

   5.  The client compares the translated name from the resolution
       process, "example.com", with the name found in the certificate,
       "example.com".

   6.  The client sends the session key encrypted with the server's
       public key back to the server.




Daigle & Newton            Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           draft-daigle-napstr-01            November 2002


   7.  If the server is really one of the servers for
       "_prim._tcp.example.com", then it will possess the corresponding
       private key to use in decrypting the session key.

   8.  The server and client communicate using encrypted means via the
       session key.

   Note that the translated name is taken from the NAPTR record and not
   the SRV record.  This is done because the use-case is such that the
   user is interested in the PRIM service for "thinkingcat.com" and not
   the particular server where it is hosted.

   Note also that this requires that the operator of the service must
   have the certificate for the service's domain.  This may cause
   problems when the final server is operated in a different realm of
   administrative control (for example, if it is outsourced to an ISP).

6.2 Trusting the DNS Signer

   Due to the fact that DNSSEC must already be used to trust this name
   resolution process, another method is to simply use the certificate
   chain for the certificate that is present in DNS.  The following
   steps illustrate this process.

   1.  The end-user types into the PRIM application the name
       "thinkingcat.com".

   2.  The final outcome of the name resolution process will yield an A
       record containing the IP address for "bigiron.example.com".

   3.  The server sends to the client its certificate.  The certificate
       chain for this certificate leads to the signer for the A record
       (the certificate is signed using the same private key as the A
       record).

   4.  The client verifies the server's certificate using the same
       public key of the A record for "bigiron.example.com".

   5.  The client sends the session key encrypted with the server's
       public key back to the server.

   6.  If the server is really bigiron.example.com, then it will possess
       the corresponding private key to use in decrypting the session
       key.

   7.  The server and client communicate using encrypted means via the
       session key.




Daigle & Newton            Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           draft-daigle-napstr-01            November 2002


   The key premise in this case is that DNSSEC ensures the resolution
   yields trustable data in naming the final target server, and
   therefore only that server's named certificate must be validated
   (against the same chain of trust) in order to trust the server
   itself.  This approach does not require that the final server have a
   certificate for the named service, and it works for NAPTR, NAPTR+SRV,
   or just SRV name redirection.

7. IANA Considerations

   ?? Fill out with specifics for registering "application service" tags
   (and "application protocols", if this is something other than the
   existing port registry).

8. Security Considerations

   This is primarily addressed in the "Transiting Trust" section,Section
   6.

9. Acknowledgements

   Many thanks to Patrik Faltstrom and Sally Floyd for discussion and
   input that has (hopefully!) provoked clarifying revisions of this
   document.

References

   [1]  Eastlake, D., "Domain Name System Security Extensions", RFC
        2535, March 1999.

   [2]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P. and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
        specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
        February 2000.

   [3]  Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
        One: The Comprehe nsive DDDS", RFC 3401, October 2002.

   [4]  Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
        Three: The Domain Name System (DNS) Database", RFC 3403, October
        2002.

   [5]  Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part
        Four: The Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI)", RFC 3404, October
        2002.







Daigle & Newton            Expires May 5, 2003                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           draft-daigle-napstr-01            November 2002


Authors' Addresses

   Leslie Daigle
   VeriSign, Inc.
   21355 Ridgetop Circle
   Dulles, VA  20166
   US

   EMail: leslie@verisignlabs.com; leslie@thinkingcat.com


   Andrew Newton
   VeriSign, Inc.
   21355 Ridgetop Circle
   Dulles, VA  20166
   US

   EMail: anewton@verisignlabs.com

Appendix A. Application Service Location Application of DDDS

   This section defines the DDDS application, as described in [3].

A.1 Application Unique String

   The Application Unique String is the name of the domain in which an
   authoritative server for a particular service is sought.

A.2 First Well Known Rule

   The "First Well Known Rule" is identity -- that is, the output of the
   rule is the Application Unique String, the domain for which the
   authoritative server for a particular service is sought.

A.3 Expected Output

   The expected output of this Application is the information necessary
   to connect to authoritative server(s) (host, port, protocol) for an
   application service within a given a given domain.

A.4 Flags

   This DDDS Application uses only 3 of the Flags defined for the
   URI/URN Resolution Application ([5]): "S", "A" and "U".  No other
   Flags are valid.

   All three are for terminal lookups.  This means that the Rule is the
   last one and that the flag determines what the next stage should be.



Daigle & Newton            Expires May 5, 2003                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           draft-daigle-napstr-01            November 2002


   The "S" flag means that the output of this Rule is a domain label for
   which one or more SRV [2] records exist.  "A" means that the output
   of the Rule is a domain name and should be used to lookup address
   records for that domain.  "U" means that the output of the Rule is a
   URI which should be resolved.

A.5 Service Parameters

   Service Parameters for this Application take the form of a string of
   characters that follow this ABNF ([3]):

   	service-parms =	[ [app-service] *("+" app-protocol)]
   	app-service   = ALPHA *31ALPHANUM
   	app-protocol  = ALPHA *31ALPHANUM
   	; The app-service and app-protocol fields are limited to 32
   	; characters and must start with an alphabetic character.

   Thus, the Service Parameters may consist of an empty string, just an
   app-service, or an app-service with one or more app-protocol
   specifications separated by the "+" symbol.

A.5.1 Application Services

   The "app-service" must be a registered service [this will be an IANA
   registry; this is not the IANA port registry, because we want to
   define services for which there is no single protocol, and we don't
   want to use up port space for nothing].

A.5.2 Application Protocols

   The protocol identifiers that are valid for the "app-protocol"
   production are any standard, registered protocols [IANA registry
   again -- is this the list of well known/registered ports?].

A.6 Valid Rules

   Only substitution Rules are permitted for this application.  That is,
   no regular expressions are allowed.

A.7 Valid Databases

   At present only one DDDS Database is specified for this Application.
   [4] specifies a DDDS Database that uses the NAPTR DNS resource record
   to contain the rewrite rules.  The Keys for this database are encoded
   as domain-names.

   The First Well Known Rule produces a domain name, and this is the Key
   that is used for the first lookup -- the NAPTR records for that



Daigle & Newton            Expires May 5, 2003                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           draft-daigle-napstr-01            November 2002


   domain are requested.

   DNS servers MAY interpret Flag values and use that information to
   include appropriate NAPTR, SRV or A records in the Additional
   Information portion of the DNS packet.  Clients are encouraged to
   check for additional information but are not required to do so.  See
   the Additional Information Processing section of [4] for more
   information on NAPTR records and the Additional Information section
   of a DNS response packet.










































Daigle & Newton            Expires May 5, 2003                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           draft-daigle-napstr-01            November 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Daigle & Newton            Expires May 5, 2003                 [Page 13]

