





INTERNET-DRAFT                                                Y. Arrouye
February 15, 2002                                        RealNames Corp.
Expires August 15, 2002                                        T. W. Tan
                                        National University of Singapore
                                                                  X. Lee
                                     Chinese Academy of Sciences & CNNIC

             Keywords Systems - Definition and Requirements
                   draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The DNS (Domain Name System), which was designed as a network
   resource naming layer, is not able to serve today's Internet users
   naming needs anymore. Attempts to change the DNS to adapt to those
   needs, such as the IDN (Internationalized Domain Name) IETF effort,
   are not only proving themselves unsatisfactory in many ways, they are
   also limited by the nature of DNS itself. There is now strong
   consensus that the solution for naming for the Internet requires
   layers above DNS.  For example, John Klensin has advocated a multi-
   layered model that undertakes to address the naming needs of the
   modern Internet. In Klensin's model, the layer immediately above DNS
   is fully multilingual and user-friendly. It is expected that this
   layer will support a variety of distinct services. This document



Arrouye and Tan                                                 [Page 1]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


   presents the requirements of one class of naming service called
   Keywords systems, of which there are several deployed today. These
   requirements are presented from the perspective of Internet users,
   for whom there exists no satisfactory standard naming system.

1.  Introduction

   The Internet has evolved from a simple interconnection of networks to
   a global infrastructure supporting academic, personal, governmental,
   and commercial communications. As a result, the Internet's main
   naming system, the DNS, has seen its use change dramatically. As the
   number of names in demand has increased, so has the realization that
   there is a profound mismatch between a name meant to be used by
   humans and one meant to be used by applications. Because they have
   been the only names available for use on the Internet, domain names
   could not remain simply resource names, but rather were pushed to
   became the labels that every Internet user would ideally associate
   with the content they sought to access. That push has not happened
   smoothly. Attempts to change the nature of DNS names by
   internationalizing them do not solve the main problem of the
   awkwardness of DNS names in a versatile, multilingual, human-friendly
   naming scheme for the global Internet.

   As result of the apparent inadequacy of approaches that try to
   improve the ability of the DNS to serve as a universal, human-
   friendly naming scheme, there is now strong consensus for
   establishing a new layer of naming on top of the DNS [DNSROLE,
   DNSSEARCH]. This new layer will allow the Internet community to
   redefine naming in light of actual needs, without having to change
   the DNS or rely on its evolution. The community stresses the
   necessity for the new layer to go beyond the needs of the Domain Name
   System to realize an architecture capable of accommodating diverse
   services, with separate ownerships, different scopes and distinct
   operating models.

   One of the operating and addressing models proposed as a component of
   this new layer is Keywords systems. These systems offer a
   multilingual naming layer that is human-friendly and simple to use.
   Many Keywords systems that offer similar user experiences are in
   existence today: RealNames, worldwide; CNNIC, in China; 3721, in
   China; TWNIC in Taiwan; Netpia, in Korea; Nipa, in Thailand, and AOL,
   within its own network.  The proliferation of Keywords systems in the
   Asia-Pacific region emphasizes the DNS's lack of support for non-
   Latin scripts.

   This document presents the requirements that define Keywords systems
   that will be able to interoperate and expand their usefulness.




Arrouye and Tan                                                 [Page 2]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


   The goals of this document are:

   1. To present a clear list of Keywords requirements.

   2. To document the Keywords user experience. This defines how
      Keywords are being and should be used by Internet users.

   3. To document properties of Keywords systems or Keywords objects
      that are deemed useful in every Keywords system.

   4. To provide a framework for discussion of Keywords systems and
      their standardization.

   In this document, the terms Keyword or Keyword name have the same
   meaning, which is the name of a Keyword. The term Keyword object, or
   Keyword resource descriptor, refers to a more complex object
   containing properties, or facets, of which the Keyword name is one.
   The Keyword object is described in detail in this document.

   The definition of terms related to internationalization are those
   introduced in [I18NTERMS].

2.  User Requirements that are Met by Keyword Systems

   Keywords systems should be architected to meet user expectations. The
   industry generally agrees that the following are the basic
   requirements of any successful Keywords system.

2.1.  Unique Names and Identities

   The Keyword name is the only element of the Keyword object that the
   users manipulate. In order for Keywords to function as an effective
   addressing system (see Direct Navigation Using Keywords), a name must
   be associated with only one destination in a given context (cf.
   context below).

   The importance of the uniqueness of the names is reinforced by the
   need to support the notion of online identity. One's identity needs
   to be clearly and unambiguously defined, and thus unique.

2.2.  Above DNS

   The DNS in its current form cannot accommodate the Internet's current
   naming requirements. Neither can it be changed significantly.
   Keywords systems must exist separately from the DNS to offer
   applications an independent naming interface. The common view of DNS
   and other addressing system is to place the low level systems below
   others, so DNS is viewed as above IP addresses, and Keywords systems



Arrouye and Tan                                                 [Page 3]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


   would be viewed as above DNS and URIs.

2.3.  Multilingual

   Keywords must be available in all languages and scripts. Because
   Keywords systems are implemented electronically, and because it is
   agreed that it is practical to use a single encoding for the names,
   the languages and scripts that Keywords must support are those of
   that encoding that will be picked.

2.4.  Context-Based

   While the name is the most important element of a Keyword object, it
   benefits from being supplemented by other attributes such as country,
   language, type of application (also called service type in [SLS] and
   [KLS]), etc. These attributes are also referred to as facets. (See
   "Benefits of Direct Navigation" for a further discussion of context.)

2.5.  Applicable Across Multiple Applications

   Keywords must function in a broad variety of applications and
   devices, such as the World Wide Web, mobile phones, e-mail, etc.

2.6.  Multiple Interoperable Namespaces

   Due to the complexities of languages, local usage and policy
   differences in countries or application domains, it is neither
   feasible nor practical to implement a single, worldwide Keywords
   system. A differentiated, interoperable federation of Keywords
   systems will provide the flexibility and depth needed. These Keywords
   systems will be unified by a single resolution protocol that will
   guarantee interoperability of the Keywords systems for applications.

3.  Keywords User Experiences

   There are two common user experiences associated with Keywords. The
   most common one, and the one that makes Keywords appealing, is
   navigation. The second one is discovery. These experiences are
   described below.

3.1.  Direct Navigation Using Keywords

   The goal of all Keywords systems is to make it as simple as possible
   to reach a given physical destination by using a simple human-
   friendly name. A physical destination is anything that can be
   described by a URI [RFC2396], so for example a Web page, an e-mail
   address, or a WAP page on a mobile phone are all physical
   destinations. Internet destinations are one kind of physical



Arrouye and Tan                                                 [Page 4]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


   destinations.

   The typical experience of a user of a Keywords system is as follows:

   1. The user enters a Keyword in her own language in her application,
      and eventually selects an action (e.g. "go" in a Web browser, or
      simply hitting the "enter" key).

   2. The application transparently uses a Keywords system to map the
      Keyword to a physical address that is appropriate to its domain
      (e.g. a Web address for a Web browser, an e-mail address for a
      mail user agent, etc.).

   3. The physical address that has just been obtained is used to
      perform the user-specified action (e.g. load a Web page, send e-
      mail to a specific mailbox, etc.).

   This is called direct navigation, as it lets a user go directly to a
   destination using this simple name.

3.1.1.  Benefits of Direct Navigation

   Direct navigation is what makes Keywords systems appealing to users
   as an addressing system.  Keywords systems are designed with the
   objective of providing the best user experience: intuitive names that
   deliver expected results. This section looks at a few benefits of
   Keyword systems.

   1. Users see Keywords as actual Internet addresses, and they work
      just like any other addressing system. Contrarily to traditional
      Internet addresses, they are easy to remember.  The critical part
      of the Keywords navigation experience is in the second step, where
      the application uses the Keyword input by the user to obtain a
      physical address. This can be done today using proprietary
      protocols or CNRP (Common Name Resolution protocol) [CNRP],
      although it is likely that if Keywords systems are deployed on a
      large scale a more compact protocol will be designed. What is
      important to understand is how the application uses the Keyword as
      well as other data to make a query to a Keywords system.

   2. A given Keyword object may contain different physical addresses
      for different applications, which is akin to saying that Keyword
      objects are identified by a combination of name and application
      type. That application type (also called service type in [SLS] and
      [KLS]) makes up some of the context that is passed to a Keywords
      system, along with a name (also part of that context), in order to
      identify a given Keyword object. Whenever the context is fully
      specified, a Keywords system will return at most one matching



Arrouye and Tan                                                 [Page 5]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


      Keyword object. This notion of context is key to the resolution of
      a Keyword query into a physical address.

   3. The more context is available, the more powerful a Keywords system
      can be, and the better user experience it can provide.  For
      example, just by introducing the language as an element of
      context, one can then use a global name like BMW, or Coca-Cola,
      and access content in the appropriate language. Obviously, such a
      language facet contributes to the human-friendliness of the system
      by allowing not only the Keyword names, but also the content they
      refer to, to be in the user's language. Such a language context is
      also quite easy to obtain, since operating systems as well as
      applications already support the notion of a user-selected
      language (such as one's browser language setting) or locale.

   Note that direct navigation does not mean that the only thing that
   can happen to a Keywords user is either to get to a destination or
   get nowhere. A Keywords service, when there is no matching Keyword
   object for the user's query, may return a list of approximate
   matches. It is up to the application to use that list and interact
   with the user as needed to pick between these matches if desired.
   Applications may also choose alternate behaviors such as using a
   search engine, or combining the approximate matches with other
   heuristics, etc...

3.1.2.  Definition of the Context

   It is very tempting to make a long list of desirable facets of a
   Keyword object. Location and industry category, for example, are two
   properties that are often mentioned, and more facets are regularly
   offered for consideration.

   An important lesson learned from operating Keywords system so far is
   that it is very difficult to ask users to supply context that is not
   already available to the application. Not only does this usually
   bring up user interface issues, it changes the user experience from a
   "type the name, get what you want" to a less direct, much more
   painful experience that drives users away from the system. It is also
   worth noting that asking for determination after the user has input a
   partial context that can match a number of Keyword objects, has the
   same effect of breaking the user experience and discouraging her. The
   key to context information in a Keywords system is that context must
   be implicit (i.e. known a priori to the application) in order to
   offer a good user experience.

   As a result, one must be very careful in introducing facets that need
   to be part of the context. On the other hand, one should always ask
   the registrant of a Keyword to provide as many facets as possible, in



Arrouye and Tan                                                 [Page 6]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


   order to be able to use them later, as applications improve and
   become able to supply meaningful values for those facets as part of a
   query to a Keywords system.

3.1.3.  Manipulation of the Context

   While the user should only be required to enter a name in order to
   reach a destination, it is desirable that the hidden parts of the
   context can be manipulated by the user. This is usually done by
   providing settings that can be used to do these manipulations. For
   example, a Web browser typically offers a way to set language
   preferences, from which the language context can be drawn.

3.2.  Discovery of Keywords

   We have so far described the experience of a user who uses a Keyword
   in order to get to a physical address. There is also a need for users
   to discover Keywords. Discovery may happen either when a user is not
   able to supply all the facets necessary to make a single
   determination, or when she only has partial data such as a few words
   of a multi-word Keyword.

   Discovery services are valuable because they offer users a way to
   browse a Keywords namespace and explore its content. They need to be
   separate from direct navigation in order to preserve the directness
   of the navigation experience. It is however possible to offer
   discovery as a fallback after a failed navigation experience, as long
   as the two experiences are clearly distinct.

3.3.  Other Variations

   In some environments, such as mobile phones, typing a full Keyword
   may prove cumbersome. It is thus a good experience, in these
   environments, to support some form of automatic completion of partial
   Keywords. The navigation may not be direct then, because confirmation
   from the user is needed, but the overall experience of using Keywords
   is improved because of the diminished pain factor in entering the
   names.


4.  The Keyword Object

   We have so far described the Keywords user experience and looked at
   two of its aspects. We have said that Keywords system contain
   Keywords objects that contain a number of facets. This section
   describes facets that make up a Keyword object. There are two kinds
   of facets, depending on whether they are used as part of the context
   or not:



Arrouye and Tan                                                 [Page 7]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


   1. Key facets are part of the context that is necessary to establish
      a one-to-one mapping between context and a physical address. The
      name and the service type are good example of such facets.

   2. Informational facets carry information that is useful but not
      required as part of the context. A description of a Keyword is a
      good example of such a facet.

   Key facets are always required. Some informational facets may be
   optional, and others may be required. In this section, the facets are
   listed with an indication of their kind.

   One should note that some facets may make sense for some service
   types and not for others. The categorization of facets below is
   intended to ensure that the facets that are key are required for all
   service types. Also, it may be interesting to allow optional context
   facets, whose presence can improve the user experience.

4.1.  Name (Key Facet)

   The name is the most visible part of a Keyword system, as it is what
   users see, remember, and then use in order to navigate. It is also
   what defines one's online identity.

   It is widely agreed that DNS and other Web-addressing systems (such
   as the URI) cannot create human-friendly names. To be human-friendly,
   a name must satisfy a number of conditions. It should be easy to
   remember.  Familiar brand names should be transferable to the
   Internet naming system with no change if possible. Names should be
   available for the whole user population, and should be available in a
   user's native languages and scripts. Finally, the syntax of names
   should be flexible enough to allow for desirable names. One will note
   that that lack of syntax not only makes the names easier to remember
   and use, it also opens the door to the use of Keywords through voice
   recognition technology available today.

   Issues pertaining to names are discussed further in the "Multilingual
   Support" section.

   While it is useful to have syntax free names, some restrictions can
   be placed on name availability in order to preserve existing
   namespaces. For instance, if a Keywords system offers a transparent
   interface to namespaces like DNS, ENUM, etc... it can prevent the
   subscription of Keywords that follow the syntax of these namespaces
   in order to avoid confusion between the different namespaces.

4.2.  Service Type (Key Facet)




Arrouye and Tan                                                 [Page 8]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


   The service type is used to describe a class of applications that
   provide a given service to users. For example, tentative service
   types are "web,"  "e-mail," "mobile web," and even "dns" or "phone."
   The service type is a primary mechanism to support the reuse of one
   given name to denote different bits of information (which are
   accessed through a given physical address).

4.3.  Service Provider (Key Facet)

   Because there are many different Keywords systems in existence, there
   is a need to be able to refer to them to determine which system a
   Keyword belongs too. That is the purpose of a service provider facet.
   The facet is part of the context that defines the uniqueness of a
   Keyword, allowing distinct Keywords provider to have their own
   Keyword object for a given Keyword.

4.4.  Language (Key Facet)

   The language facet denotes the language of the Keyword. It can be
   used, for example, to enable language-specific rules of
   normalization, or simply to determine how to display a CJK name made
   of unified Han characters.

   There are many standards or would-be standards for the identification
   of languages. The IETF standard for languages is defined in
   [RFC3066], which obsoletes [RFC1766], still cited by many protocols
   and IETF work documents. Also note that [RFC2277] says that language
   tagging in IETF protocols should be done using this standard. The
   biggest advantage of using language tags as defined in [RFC1766] is
   that existing protocols and applications support them, which makes it
   easy to obtain a language facet value as part of the Keyword request
   context without user interaction.

   An oft-cited categorization of languages is the one produced by SIL
   International. Known as the Ethnologue [ETHNOLOGUE] their work
   categorizes and uniquely identifies more than 6,700 languages used in
   228 countries. There have been proposals to make the Ethnologue
   categorization available as an Internet categorization, and one could
   indeed use i-sil-xxx to refer to the Ethnologue language code xxx in
   perfect conformance with [RFC1766], but today's applications are not
   aware of Ethnologue language codes.

4.5.  Content-Language (Key Facet)

   The content-language facet describes the language of the content that
   is accessed through the physical address. For instance, if the
   Keyword named "Deutsche Telekom" has the Web physical address
   http://www.telekom.de/dtag/ipl2e/cda/t1/ then the content language



Arrouye and Tan                                                 [Page 9]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


   should be English since that is the language of the content.

   This facet can be used for language negotiation, which is supported
   in some protocols already. he facet uses the same standard as the
   language facet to identify the language.

4.6.  Country (Key Facet)

   The country facet refers to the country for which the content
   accessed through the physical address is intended. Countries are
   indicated by using country codes from ISO 3166 [ISO3166]. ISO 3166 is
   a three-part standard. The part relevant to current countries is ISO
   3166-1. It standardizes names of countries and associates them with 2
   and 3 letter codes referred to as alpha-2 and alpha-3, respectively.
   Internet usage, primarily stemming from RFC3066, is to use the
   alpha-2 variant.

   Applications are only starting to support separation between language
   and countries. Such a separation is very important, because it
   enables to offer a good service to ethnic groups in a given location.
   When language and country are mixed, only the populations large
   enough to have a recognized dialect in that country can be serviced.
   In order to provide backwards compatibility, it is permissible to use
   the country component of an RFC3066 language tag in order to
   determine the value of the country facet.

4.7.  Physical Address (Informational Facet, Required)

   This facet contains the address that the Keyword overlays, i.e. the
   real name of the data that are accessed using the Keyword. It is
   proposed that this facet always be a URI, which may require the
   definition of new URI schemes for existing addressing systems. The
   URI was designed as an extensible addressing system, and it would be
   nice to take advantage of its properties for the physical addressing
   component of Keywords systems.

4.8.  Description (Informational Facet)

   While key facets are necessary for querying a Keywords system,
   informational facets are useful when displaying Keywords in listings,
   such as the ones that a discovery service may provide. The
   description facets describes a Keyword in a few sentences, in such a
   way that its meaning is obvious to a reader.

   There must be one description for the language of the Keyword, i.e.
   if the Keyword is associated to Korean content, there must be a
   Korean description. It may be desirable to support additional
   descriptions in other languages.



Arrouye and Tan                                                [Page 10]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


4.9.  Location (Informational Facet)

   This facet is often mentioned as something that is very useful. One
   of the main problem is to decide what kind of location to use. Valid
   suggestions include: a system like country, province, zip code, or a
   subset thereof; ISO 3166-2; latitude, longitude, altitude; ECEF
   (Earth-Centered, Earth-Fixed); and probably others. Note that it is
   possible to go from one of the fine-grain systems to the coarser-
   grain ones, but that the (lack of) availability of mapping tables may
   be a factor. It is also possible to support more than one location
   notation at the same time.

   For applications like mobile phones, the location of the user
   relative to cell towers (whose locations on or above Earth are
   themselves known) is known by the mobile phone operator and could be
   made part of the context. Note that this particular example raises
   some privacy issues that the operator or service need to take care
   of.

4.10. Category (Informational Facet)

   There has been talk of the necessity of having some sort of industry
   category facet in the next Internet naming layer, and of making it
   part of the facets that determine the uniqueness of records in this
   layer. While we agree that such information is useful meta-data that
   can be used in a discovery service, there are some problems with
   making such a category part of the context:

   - Even though one may argue that the categories listed in WIPO's Nice
   agreement [WIPO-NICE] are encompassing enough for industry
   categories, there is no established standard for non-industry
   categories. The development and ratification of such standard is a
   very big task in itself.

   - Applications do not support categories. If they did, it is doubtful
   that a typical user could come to grasp with the big tree of
   categories. And if only the top-level classes were to be offered to
   users for selections, they would be lost even more since those
   classes mix things such as computer software design and animal
   grooming. And the fact that our [Ed.: RealNames'] marketing lady
   calls us monkeys does not make that really clearer for everyone.

   As a consequence of these problems, Keywords systems do not support
   such data as a key facet, but only as an informational one.


5.  Multilingual Support




Arrouye and Tan                                                [Page 11]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


   It is understood that today, the best way to manipulate names for
   multiple scripts is to rely on encoding those names using Unicode
   [UNICODE]. This is the proposed encoding of names for Keywords
   system. References to characters or character sequences in this
   document are made using Unicode.

5.1.   Human-friendliness can also be achieved by helping users get the
   desired result through some normalization of the names that are used.
   For example, it is desirable to treat the sequence <U+0065 LATIN
   SMALL LETTER e><U+0301 COMBINING ACUTE ACCENT> as equivalent as
   <U+00E9 LATIN SMALL LETTER E WITH ACUTE> (the former sequence being a
   canonical decomposition of the second one [UTR15]). But other
   features of human-friendliness, for example respecting alternate
   spelling rules for German, or handling traditional versus simplified
   Chinese writing systems, are not always understood, or simply agreed
   on. There is a need to define the requirements necessary for the
   interoperability of Keywords systems, and what features can be used
   to distinguish different services between each other. These issues
   are discussed at a further point in this document.

   Note that the discussion of normalization above is not a discussion
   of Unicode normalization. It is a discussion of string normalization
   that may use Unicode normalization as a tool. A better term may be
   string preparation, and it would be desirable to use the framework
   defined in [STRINGPREP] for such a normalization, if possible. Note
   that there may be a need for different Stringprep profiles for
   different languages, something that Keywords systems can support
   thanks to their rich set of facets.

   Different names normalization on top of the default normalization may
   be an interesting service differentiator.

5.2.  Traditional and Simplified Chinese

   The Chinese language can be written in two forms: Simplified Chinese
   (SC), used in the People's Republic of China (PRC) and Singapore; and
   Traditional Chinese (TC) used in Taiwan, Hong Kong, Macau, and by
   most Chinese people overseas. One of the issues that face naming
   systems is that one name registered in one form may be used by users
   writing the other form. Also, mixed form names may be an issue for
   the same reason.

   A common fallacy is to believe that there is a straightforward 1-to-1
   mapping between the forms. Some of the Chinese characters of one form
   have 1-to-many mappings, others have many-to-1 mappings, and others,
   when in groups, cannot be easily converted without risking changes in
   the meaning of the converted sequence. Also, some characters are used
   in both traditional and simplified Chinese. As a result, the problem



Arrouye and Tan                                                [Page 12]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


   of matching Chinese input to registered Chinese names is complex.
   However, Keywords systems may be able to offer a better solution than
   existing systems to the problem of handling traditional and
   simplified Chinese names.

   First of all, Keywords systems fully support the notions of country
   and language. Because the choice of using traditional and simplified
   Chinese was dictated by countries, that support will help solving
   that problem. For example, one common objection to mapping between
   Traditional and Simplified Chinese forms is that the Unicode code
   points for Traditional Chinese are also used in Japanese and Korean.
   Having the language available prevents unwanted alteration of names
   in these languages. Also, the availability of the country could lead
   to different mapping rules agreeable to that particular country.

6.  Conclusion

   We have presented the requirements for Keywords systems, the Keywords
   user experience, as well as some design and architecture
   considerations.

   Keywords systems, which are already deployed worldwide,  will
   represent an important component of the next Internet naming
   architecture.

7.  References

   [CNRP] N. Popp, M. Mealling, and M. Moseley, Common Name Resolution
   Protocol (CNRP), draft-ietf-cnrp-10.txt, June 2001.

   [CONTLANG] H. Alvestrand, Content Language Headers, draft-alvestrand-
   content-language-02.txt, May 2001.

   [DNSROLE] J. Klensin, Role of the Domain Name System, draft-klensin-
   dns-role-01.txt, May 2001.

   [DNSSEARCH] J. Klensin, A Search-based access model for the DNS,
   draft-klensin-dns-search-01.txt, July 2001.

   [ETHNOLOGUE] SIL International, The Ethnologue,
   http://www.ethnologue.org/.

   [I18NTERMS] P. Hoffman, Terminology Used in Internationalization in
   the IETF, draft-hoffman-i18n-terms-05.txt, January 2002.

   [IDNWG] IETF IDN Working group,
   http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/idn-charter.html.




Arrouye and Tan                                                [Page 13]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


   [ISO3166] ISO 3166 Maintenance Agency, ISO 3166 Standard,
   http://www.din.de/gremien/nas/nabd/iso3166ma/.

   [KLS] Y. Arrouye, V. Parikh, and N. Popp, Keyword Lookup Systems As a
   Class of Naming Systems, draft-arrouye-kls-00.txt, August 2001.

   [NAMEPREP] P. Hoffman and M. Blanchet, Stringprep Profile for
   Internationalized Domain Name, draft-ietf-idn-nameprep-07.txt,
   January 2002.

   [PROVREGWG] IETF Provreg Working Group,
   http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/provreg-charter.html.

   [RFC1766] H. Alvestrand, Tags for the Identification of Languages,
   RFC 1766, March 1995.

   [RFC2277] H. Alvestrand, IETF Policy on Character Sets and Languages,
   RFC 2277, January 1998.

   [RFC2396] T. Berners-Lee, R. Fielding, L. Masinter, Uniform Resource
   Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax, RFC 2396, August 1998.

   [RFC2916] P. Faltstrom, E.164 number and DNS, RFC 2916, September
   2000.

   [RFC3066] H. Alvestrand, Tags for the Identification of Languages,
   RFC 1766, January 2001.

   [SLS] M. Mealling and L. Daigle, Service Lookup System (SLS), draft-
   mealling-sls-00.txt, July 2001.

   [STRINGPREP] P. Hoffman and M. Blanchet, Preparation of
   Internationalized Strings ("stringprep"), draft-hoffman-
   stringprep-00.txt, Septermber 2001.

   [UAX15] M. Davis and M. Duerst, Unicode Standard Annex #15: Unicode
   Normalization Forms, March 2001
   (http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/).

   [UNICODE] The Unicode Consortium, The Unicode Standard, Version 3.0,
   Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, January 2000 (ISBN 0-201-61633-5).
   Amended by the Unicode Standard Annex #27: Unicode 3.1, May 2001
   (http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr27/), and by the Unicode Standard
   Annex #28: Unicode 3.2, December 2001
   (http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr28/).

   [WIPO-NICE] World Intellectual Property Organization, "Nice Agreement
   concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for



Arrouye and Tan                                                [Page 14]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


   the Purposes of the Registration of Mark," June 1957.
   http://classifications.wipo.int/fulltext/nice/ennnic.htm.

Authors' Addresses

   Yves Arrouye
   RealNames Corporation
   150 Shoreline Drive
   Redwood City, CA 94065

   Phone: +1 (650) 486-5503

   E-mail: yves@realnames.com


   Tan Tin Wee
   Bioinformatics Centre
   National University of Singapore
   10 Kent Ridge Crescent
   Singapore 119260

   E-mail: tinwee@pobox.org.sg


   Xiaodong Lee
   Chinese Academy of Sciences & China Network Information Center
   4 South 4th Street
   ZhongGuanCun
   Beijing
   P.R. China 100080

   Phone: +86 10 62619750 3020

   E-mail: lee@cnnic.net.cn


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other



Arrouye and Tan                                                [Page 15]

draft-arrouye-keywords-reqs-01.txt                       4 February 2002


   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.































Arrouye and Tan                                                [Page 16]

