Internet Engineering Task Force                               Ed Lewis
Internet-Draft                                                NAI Labs
July 9, 2001                                  Expires: January 9, 2002

               DNS KEY Resource Record Generic Protocol Value
                   <draft-lewis-dnsext-key-genprot-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other
groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

This draft expires on January 9, 2002.

Copyright Notice

Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All rights reserved.

Abstract

A new protocol value is defined for the KEY Resource Record which
identifies the intended protocol as that identified in the SRV-like
encoding of the KEY RR's owner name.

1.0 Introduction

Starting with discussions concerning the mixing of zone keys and
application keys at a zone apex, with the implication that the signing
of the apex set makes the parent responsible for signing data
inherently specific to the child zone, various proposals have been
made to eliminate that issue.  One such proposal is to separate keys
by using the owner name, a la the SRV record.  E.g., for a host named
"host.myzone.test." a key used for SSH might be found at
"_ssh._tcp.host.myzone.test." [RFC 2782]

Other motivations for this proposal and approach to naming key is to
address issues including: concerns over size of the apex key set and
the extensive use of sub-typing KEY records.  Since it is desirable
to send the apex key set as additional data, it would be good to
limit its size (by not having to include non-zone keys).  Subtyping
refers to making a resolver filter a returned RR set to extract
the subset of records that meets the query's intent.

This draft is not intended to document the SRV naming proposal, nor
are any of the examples represented here suggestions for naming
conventions.  The intent of the draft is to define a catch-all protocol
value which informs a resolver that the intended protocol for this key
is encoded in the ownership name.

If this (or a) generic protocol proposal is not adopted, yet a naming
convention is used, the impact is that for each new protocol a new
IANA-defined value is needed for the protocol octet in addition to a
new specific naming convention.  This proposal is just a means to ease
the burden on IANA.

2.0 KEY RR Protocol Value

The unsigned integer value of <foobar> is reserved to mean that the
owner name indicates the intended protocol of the KEY RR.

3.0 Acknowledgements

This proposal has been made in conversation with Jakob Schylter and
Ilja Hallberg at a DNS meeting in Malmo Sweden.

4.0 IANA Considerations

A protocol number assignment for the DNS Key Resource Record is
requested.  The specific value is not considered important.

A suggestion to IANA is made regarding the KEY RR protocol values.
One suggested assignment algorithm (perhaps this needs a different
draft) is to assign the protocol number according to the reserved port
number.  This may help in uniqueness.

5.0 Security Considerations

This draft introduces no new security issues.

6.0 References

The text of any RFC may be retrieved by a web browser by requesting
the URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc<wxyz>.txt, where "wxyz" is the
number of the RFC.

[RFC 2026] "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", Bradner
[RFC 2535] "Domain Name System Security Extensions", Eastlake
[RFC 2782] "A DNS RR for specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)",
           Gulbrandsen, Vixie, Esibov

7.0 Editor's Address

Edward Lewis
<lewis@tislabs.com>
3060 Washington Rd (Rte 97)
Glenwood, MD 21738
+1(443)259-2352

8.0 Full Copyright Statement

Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2001.  All Rights Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing
Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined
in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to
translate it into languages other than English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
"AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN
WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


